Canceris a group of diseases involvingabnormal cell growthwith the potential toinvadeorspreadto other parts of the body.These contrast withbenign tumors, which do not spread.Possiblesigns and symptomsinclude a lump, abnormal bleeding, prolonged cough, unexplainedweight loss, and a change inbowel movements.While these symptoms may indicate cancer, they can also have other causes.Over100 typesof cancers affect humans.
Tobacco useis the cause of about 22% of cancer deaths.Another 10% are due toobesity, poordiet,lack of physical activityorexcessive alcohol consumption.Other factors include certain infections, exposure toionizing radiation, and environmental pollutants.In thedeveloping world, 15% of cancers are due to infections such asHelicobacter pylori,hepatitis B,hepatitis C,human papillomavirus infection,Epstein–Barr virusandhuman immunodeficiency virus.These factors act, at least partly, by changing thegenesof a cell.Typically, many genetic changes are required before cancer develops.Approximately 5–10% of cancers are due to inherited genetic defects.Cancer can be detected by certain signs and symptoms or screening tests.It is then typically further investigated bymedical imagingand confirmed bybiopsy.
The risk of developing certain cancers can be reduced by not smoking, maintaining a healthy weight, limiting alcohol intake, eating plenty of vegetables, fruits, andwhole grains,vaccinationagainst certain infectious diseases, limiting consumption ofprocessed meatandred meat, and limiting exposure to direct sunlight.Early detection through screening is useful forcervicalandcolorectal cancer.The benefits of screening for breast cancer are controversial.Cancer is often treated with some combination ofradiation therapy, surgery,chemotherapyandtargeted therapy.Pain and symptom management are an important part of care.Palliative careis particularly important in people with advanced disease.The chance of survival depends on the type of cancer andextent of diseaseat the start of treatment.In children under 15 at diagnosis, thefive-year survival ratein thedeveloped worldis on average 80%.For cancer in the United States, the average five-year survival rate is 66% for all ages.
In 2015, about 90.5 million people worldwide had cancer.In 2019, annual cancer cases grew by 23.6 million people and there were 10 million deaths worldwide, representing over the previous decade increases of 26% and 21%, respectively.
The most common types of cancer in males arelung cancer,prostate cancer,colorectal cancer, andstomach cancer.In females, the most common types arebreast cancer, colorectal cancer,lung cancer, andcervical cancer.Ifskin cancerother thanmelanomawere included in total new cancer cases each year, it would account for around 40% of cases.In children,acute lymphoblastic leukemiaandbrain tumorsare most common, except in Africa, wherenon-Hodgkin lymphomaoccurs more often.In 2012, about 165,000 children under 15 years of age were diagnosed with cancer.The risk of cancer increases significantly with age, and many cancers occur more commonly in developed countries.Rates are increasing asmore people live to an old ageand as lifestyle changes occur in the developing world.The global total economic costs of cancer were estimated atUS$1.16 trillion  per year as of 2010.
Cancers comprise a large family of diseases that involve abnormalcell growthwith the potential to invade or spread to other parts of the body.They form a subset ofneoplasms. A neoplasm or tumor is a group of cells that have undergone unregulated growth and will often form a mass or lump, but may be distributed diffusely.
All tumor cells show thesix hallmarks of cancer. These characteristics are required to produce a malignant tumor. They include:
The progression from normal cells to cells that can form a detectable mass to outright cancer involves multiple steps known as malignant progression.
When cancer begins, it produces no symptoms. Signs and symptoms appear as the mass grows orulcerates. The findings that result depend on cancer's type and location. Few symptoms arespecific. Many frequently occur in individuals who have other conditions. Cancer can be difficult to diagnose and can be considered a "great imitator."
People may become anxious or depressed post-diagnosis. The risk of suicide in people with cancer is approximately double.
Local symptoms may occur due to the mass of the tumor or its ulceration. For example, mass effects from lung cancer can block thebronchusresulting in cough orpneumonia;esophageal cancercan cause narrowing of theesophagus, making it difficult or painful to swallow; andcolorectal cancermay lead to narrowing or blockages in thebowel, affecting bowel habits. Masses in breasts or testicles may produce observable lumps.Ulcerationcan cause bleeding that can lead to symptoms such ascoughing up blood,anemiaorrectal bleeding,blood in the urine, orabnormal vaginal bleeding. Although localized pain may occur in advanced cancer, the initial tumor is usually painless. Some cancers can cause a buildup of fluid within the chest orabdomen.
Systemic symptoms may occur due to the body's response to the cancer. This may include fatigue, unintentional weight loss, or skin changes.Some cancers can cause a systemic inflammatory state that leads to ongoing muscle loss and weakness, known ascachexia.
Some cancers, such asHodgkin's disease,leukemias, andliverorkidney cancers, can cause a persistentfever.
Some systemic symptoms of cancer are caused by hormones or other molecules produced by the tumor, known asparaneoplastic syndromes. Common paraneoplastic syndromes includehypercalcemia, which can causealtered mental state, constipation and dehydration, orhyponatremia, which can also cause altered mental status, vomiting, headaches, or seizures.
Metastasisis the spread of cancer to other locations in the body. The dispersed tumors are called metastatic tumors, while the original is called the primary tumor. Almost all cancers can metastasize.Most cancer deaths are due to cancer that has metastasized.
Metastasis is common in the late stages of cancer and it can occur via the blood or thelymphatic systemor both. The typical steps in metastasis are localinvasion,intravasationinto the blood or lymph, circulation through the body,extravasationinto the new tissue, proliferation andangiogenesis. Different types of cancers tend to metastasize to particular organs, but overall the most common places for metastases to occur are thelungs,liver, brain, and thebones.
While some cancers can be cured if detected early, metastatic cancer is more difficult to treat and control. Nevertheless, some recent treatments are demonstrating encouraging results.
The majority of cancers, some 90–95% of cases, are due to genetic mutations from environmental and lifestyle factors.The remaining 5–10% are due toinherited genetics.Environmentalrefers to any cause that is notinherited, such as lifestyle, economic, and behavioral factors and not merely pollution.Common environmental factors that contribute to cancer death include tobacco use , diet andobesity, infections ,radiation, lack ofphysical activity, and pollution.Psychological stress does not appear to be a risk factor for the onset of cancer,though it may worsen outcomes in those who already have cancer.
It is not generally possible to prove what caused a particular cancer because the various causes do not have specific fingerprints. For example, if a person who uses tobacco heavily develops lung cancer, then it was probably caused by the tobacco use, but since everyone has a small chance of developing lung cancer as a result of air pollution or radiation, the cancer may have developed for one of those reasons. Excepting the rare transmissions that occur with pregnancies and occasionalorgan donors, cancer is generally not atransmissible disease,however factors that may have contributed to the development of cancer can be transmissible; such as oncoviruses likehepatitis B,Epstein-Barr virusand HIV.
Exposure to particular substances have been linked to specific types of cancer. These substances are calledcarcinogens.
Tobacco smoke, for example, causes 90% of lung cancer.It also causes cancer in thelarynx, head, neck, stomach, bladder, kidney,esophagusandpancreas.Tobacco smoke contains over fifty known carcinogens, includingnitrosaminesandpolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
Tobacco is responsible for about one in five cancer deaths worldwideand about one in three in the developed world.Lung cancer death rates in the United States have mirroredsmokingpatterns, with increases in smoking followed by dramatic increases in lung cancer death rates and, more recently, decreases in smoking rates since the 1950s followed by decreases in lung cancer death rates in men since 1990.
In Western Europe, 10% of cancers in males and 3% of cancers in females are attributed to alcohol exposure, especially liver and digestive tract cancers.Cancer from work-related substance exposures may cause between 2 and 20% of cases,causing at least 200,000 deaths.Cancers such as lung cancer andmesotheliomacan come from inhaling tobacco smoke orasbestosfibers, orleukemiafrom exposure tobenzene.
Exposure toperfluorooctanoic acid, which is predominantly used in the production ofTeflon, is known to cause two kinds of cancer.
Some specific foods are linked to specific cancers. A high-salt diet is linked togastric cancer.Aflatoxin B1, a frequent food contaminant, causes liver cancer.Betel nutchewing can cause oral cancer.National differences in dietary practices may partly explain differences in cancer incidence. For example,gastric canceris more common in Japan due to its high-salt dietwhilecolon canceris more common in the United States. Immigrant cancer profiles mirror those of their new country, often within one generation.
Worldwide, approximately 18% of cancer deaths are related toinfectious diseases.This proportion ranges from a high of 25% in Africa to less than 10% in the developed world.Viruses are the usual infectious agents that cause cancer butcancer bacteriaandparasitesmay also play a role.Oncoviruses include:
Bacterial infection may also increase the risk of cancer, as seen inHelicobacter pylori-inducedgastric carcinoma.
Parasitic infections associated with cancer include:
Radiation exposure such asultraviolet radiationand radioactive material is a risk factor for cancer.Manynon-melanoma skin cancersare due to ultraviolet radiation, mostly from sunlight.Sources of ionizing radiation includemedical imagingandradongas.
Ionizing radiation is not a particularly strongmutagen.Residential exposure toradongas, for example, has similar cancer risks aspassive smoking.Radiation is a more potent source of cancer when combined with other cancer-causing agents, such as radon plus tobacco smoke.Radiation can cause cancer in most parts of the body, in all animals and at any age. Children are twice as likely to develop radiation-induced leukemia as adults; radiation exposure before birth has ten times the effect.
Medical use of ionizing radiation is a small but growing source of radiation-induced cancers. Ionizing radiation may be used to treat other cancers, but this may, in some cases, induce a second form of cancer.It is also used in some kinds ofmedical imaging.
Prolonged exposure toultraviolet radiationfrom thesuncan lead tomelanomaand other skin malignancies.Clear evidence establishes ultraviolet radiation, especially the non-ionizing medium waveUVB, as the cause of most non-melanomaskin cancers, which are the most common forms of cancer in the world.
Non-ionizingradio frequencyradiation from mobile phones,electric power transmissionand other similar sources has been described as apossible carcinogenby theWorld Health Organization'sInternational Agency for Research on Cancer.Evidence, however, has not supported a concern.This includes that studies have not found a consistent link between mobile phone radiation and cancer risk.
The vast majority of cancers are non-hereditary .Hereditary cancersare primarily caused by an inherited genetic defect. Less than 0.3% of the population are carriers of a genetic mutation that has a large effect on cancer risk and these cause less than 3–10% of cancer.Some of thesesyndromesinclude: certain inherited mutations in the genesBRCA1andBRCA2with a more than 75% risk of breast cancer andovarian cancer,andhereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, which is present in about 3% of people withcolorectal cancer,among others.
Statistically for cancers causing most mortality, therelative riskof developingcolorectal cancerwhen afirst-degree relative has been diagnosed with it is about 2.The corresponding relative risk is 1.5 for lung cancer,and 1.9 forprostate cancer.For breast cancer, the relative risk is 1.8 with a first-degree relative having developed it at 50 years of age or older, and 3.3 when the relative developed it when being younger than 50 years of age.
Taller people have an increased risk of cancer because they have more cells than shorter people. Since height is genetically determined to a large extent, taller people have a heritable increase of cancer risk.
Some substances cause cancer primarily through their physical, rather than chemical, effects.A prominent example of this is prolonged exposure toasbestos, naturally occurring mineral fibers that are a major cause ofmesothelioma usually the serous membrane surrounding the lungs.Other substances in this category, including both naturally occurring and synthetic asbestos-like fibers, such aswollastonite,attapulgite,glass woolandrock wool, are believed to have similar effects.Non-fibrous particulate materials that cause cancer include powdered metalliccobaltandnickelandcrystalline silica.Usually, physical carcinogens must get inside the body  and require years of exposure to produce cancer.
Physical trauma resulting in cancer is relatively rare.Claims that breaking bones resulted in bone cancer, for example, have not been proven.Similarly, physical trauma is not accepted as a cause for cervical cancer, breast cancer or brain cancer.One accepted source is frequent, long-term application of hot objects to the body. It is possible that repeated burns on the same part of the body, such as those produced bykangerand kairo heaters , may produce skin cancer, especially if carcinogenic chemicals are also present.Frequent consumption of scalding hot tea may produce esophageal cancer.Generally, it is believed that cancer arises, or a pre-existing cancer is encouraged, during the process of healing, rather than directly by the trauma.However, repeated injuries to the same tissues might promote excessive cell proliferation, which could then increase the odds of a cancerous mutation.
Chronicinflammationhas been hypothesized to directly cause mutation.Inflammation can contribute to proliferation, survival, angiogenesis and migration of cancer cells by influencing thetumor microenvironment.Oncogenesbuild up an inflammatory pro-tumorigenic microenvironment.
Somehormonesplay a role in the development of cancer by promotingcell proliferation.Insulin-like growth factorsand their binding proteins play a key role in cancer cell proliferation, differentiation andapoptosis, suggesting possible involvement in carcinogenesis.
Hormones are important agents in sex-related cancers, such as cancer of the breast,endometrium, prostate, ovary andtestisand also ofthyroid cancerandbone cancer.For example, the daughters of women who have breast cancer have significantly higher levels ofestrogenandprogesteronethan the daughters of women without breast cancer. These higher hormone levels may explain their higher risk of breast cancer, even in the absence of a breast-cancer gene.Similarly, men of African ancestry have significantly higher levels oftestosteronethan men of European ancestry and have a correspondingly higher level of prostate cancer.Men of Asian ancestry, with the lowest levels of testosterone-activatingandrostanediol glucuronide, have the lowest levels of prostate cancer.
Other factors are relevant: obese people have higher levels of some hormones associated with cancer and a higher rate of those cancers.Women who takehormone replacement therapyhave a higher risk of developing cancers associated with those hormones.On the other hand, people who exercise far more than average have lower levels of these hormones and lower risk of cancer.Osteosarcomamay be promoted bygrowth hormones.Some treatments and prevention approaches leverage this cause by artificially reducing hormone levels and thus discouraging hormone-sensitive cancers.
There is an association betweenceliac diseaseand an increased risk of all cancers. People with untreated celiac disease have a higher risk, but this risk decreases with time after diagnosis and strict treatment, probably due to the adoption of agluten-free diet, which seems to have a protective role against development of malignancy in people with celiac disease. However, the delay in diagnosis and initiation of a gluten-free diet seems to increase the risk of malignancies.Rates of gastrointestinal cancers are increased in people withCrohn's diseaseandulcerative colitis, due to chronic inflammation. Also,immunomodulatorsandbiologic agentsused to treat these diseases may promote developing extra-intestinal malignancies.
Cancer is fundamentally a disease of tissue growth regulation. For a normal cell totransforminto a cancer cell, thegenesthat regulate cell growth and differentiation must be altered.
The affected genes are divided into two broad categories.Oncogenesare genes that promote cell growth and reproduction.Tumor suppressor genesare genes that inhibit cell division and survival. Malignant transformation can occur through the formation of novel oncogenes, the inappropriate over-expression of normal oncogenes, or by the under-expression or disabling of tumor suppressor genes. Typically, changes in multiple genes are required to transform a normal cell into a cancer cell.
Genetic changes can occur at different levels and by different mechanisms. The gain or loss of an entirechromosomecan occur through errors inmitosis. More common aremutations, which are changes in thenucleotidesequence of genomic DNA.
Large-scale mutations involve the deletion or gain of a portion of a chromosome.Genomic amplificationoccurs when a cell gains copies  of a small chromosomal locus, usually containing one or more oncogenes and adjacent genetic material.Translocationoccurs when two separate chromosomal regions become abnormally fused, often at a characteristic location. A well-known example of this is thePhiladelphia chromosome, or translocation of chromosomes 9 and 22, which occurs inchronic myelogenous leukemiaand results in production of theBCR-ablfusion protein, an oncogenictyrosine kinase.
Small-scale mutations include point mutations, deletions, and insertions, which may occur in thepromoterregion of a gene and affect itsexpression, or may occur in the gene'scoding sequenceand alter the function or stability of itsproteinproduct. Disruption of a single gene may also result fromintegration of genomic materialfrom aDNA virusorretrovirus, leading to the expression ofviraloncogenes in the affected cell and its descendants.
Replication of the data contained within the DNA of living cells willprobabilisticallyresult in some errors . Complex error correction and prevention are built into the process and safeguard the cell against cancer. If a significant error occurs, the damaged cell can self-destruct through programmed cell death, termedapoptosis. If the error control processes fail, then the mutations will survive and be passed along todaughter cells.
Some environments make errors more likely to arise and propagate. Such environments can include the presence of disruptive substances calledcarcinogens, repeated physical injury, heat, ionising radiation, orhypoxia.
The errors that cause cancer are self-amplifying and compounding, for example:
The transformation of a normal cell into cancer is akin to achain reactioncaused by initial errors, which compound into more severe errors, each progressively allowing the cell to escape more controls that limit normal tissue growth. This rebellion-like scenario is an undesirablesurvival of the fittest, where the driving forces ofevolutionwork against the body's design and enforcement of order. Once cancer has begun to develop, this ongoing process, termedclonal evolution, drives progression towards more invasivestages.Clonal evolution leads to intra-tumour heterogeneity that complicates designing effective treatment strategies and requires anevolutionary approach to designing treatment.
Characteristic abilities developed by cancers are divided into categories, specifically evasion of apoptosis, self-sufficiency in growth signals, insensitivity to anti-growth signals, sustained angiogenesis, limitless replicative potential, metastasis, reprogramming of energy metabolism and evasion of immune destruction.
The classical view of cancer is a set of diseases driven by progressivegeneticabnormalitiesthat include mutations in tumor-suppressor genes andoncogenes, and inchromosomalabnormalities. A role forepigenetic alterationswas identified in the early 21st century.
Epigeneticalterations are functionally relevant modifications to the genome that do not change the nucleotide sequence. Examples of such modifications are changes inDNA methylation,histone modificationand changes in chromosomal architecture .Each of these alterations regulates gene expression without altering the underlyingDNA sequence. These changes may remain throughcell divisions, endure for multiple generations, and can be considered as equivalent to mutations.
Epigenetic alterations occur frequently in cancers. As an example, one study listed protein coding genes that were frequently altered in theirmethylationin association with colon cancer. These included 147 hypermethylated and 27 hypomethylated genes. Of the hypermethylated genes, 10 were hypermethylated in 100% of colon cancers and many others were hypermethylated in more than 50% of colon cancers.
While epigenetic alterations are found in cancers, the epigenetic alterations in DNA repair genes, causing reduced expression of DNA repair proteins, may be of particular importance. Such alterations may occur early in progression to cancer and are a possible cause of thegeneticinstability characteristic of cancers.
Reduced expression of DNA repair genes disrupts DNA repair. This is shown in the figure at the 4th level from the top.  When DNA repair is deficient DNA damage remains in cells at a higher than usual level  and causes increased frequencies of mutation and/or epimutation . Mutation rates increase substantially in cells defective inDNA mismatch repairor inhomologous recombinationalrepair .Chromosomal rearrangements and aneuploidy also increase in HRR defective cells.
Higher levels of DNA damage cause increased mutation  and increased epimutation. During repair of DNA double strand breaks, or repair of other DNA damage, incompletely cleared repair sites can cause epigenetic gene silencing.
Deficient expression of DNA repair proteins due to an inherited mutation can increase cancer risks. Individuals with an inherited impairment in any of 34 DNA repair genes  have increased cancer risk, with some defects ensuring a 100% lifetime chance of cancer .Germ line DNA repair mutations are noted on the figure's left side. However, suchgermlinemutations  are the cause of only about 1 percent of cancers.
In sporadic cancers, deficiencies in DNA repair are occasionally caused by a mutation in a DNA repair gene but are much more frequently caused by epigenetic alterations that reduce or silence expression of DNA repair genes. This is indicated in the figure at the 3rd level. Many studies of heavy metal-induced carcinogenesis show that such heavy metals cause a reduction in expression of DNA repair enzymes, some through epigenetic mechanisms. DNA repair inhibition is proposed to be a predominant mechanism in heavy metal-induced carcinogenicity. In addition, frequent epigenetic alterations of the DNA sequences code for small RNAs calledmicroRNAs. miRNAs do not code for proteins, but can "target" protein-coding genes and reduce their expression.
Cancers usually arise from an assemblage of mutations and epimutations that confer a selective advantage leading to clonal expansion . Mutations, however, may not be as frequent in cancers as epigenetic alterations. An average cancer of the breast or colon can have about 60 to 70 protein-altering mutations, of which about three or four may be "driver" mutations and the remaining ones may be "passenger" mutations.
Metastasisis the spread of cancer to other locations in the body. The dispersed tumors are called metastatic tumors, while the original is called the primary tumor. Almost all cancers can metastasize.Most cancer deaths are due to cancer that has metastasized.
Metastasis is common in the late stages of cancer and it can occur via the blood or thelymphatic systemor both. The typical steps in metastasis are localinvasion,intravasationinto the blood or lymph, circulation through the body,extravasationinto the new tissue, proliferation andangiogenesis. Different types of cancers tend to metastasize to particular organs, but overall the most common places for metastases to occur are thelungs,liver, brain and thebones.
Normal cells typically generate only about 30% of energy fromglycolysis,whereas most cancers rely on glycolysis for energy production .But a minority of cancer types rely onoxidative phosphorylationas the primary energy source, includinglymphoma,leukemia, andendometrial cancer.Even in these cases, however, the use of glycolysis as an energy source rarely exceeds 60%.A few cancers useglutamineas the major energy source, partly because it provides nitrogen required fornucleotide synthesis.Cancer stem cellsoften use oxidative phosphorylation or glutamine as a primary energy source.
Several studies have indicated that the enzymesirtuin 6is selectively inactivated duringoncogenesisin a variety of tumor types by inducing glycolysis.Anothersirtuin,sirtuin 3inhibits cancers that depend uponglycolysis, but promotes cancers that depend uponoxidative phosphorylation.
Alow-carbohydrate diet has sometimes been recommended as a supportive therapy for cancer treatment.
Most cancers are initially recognized either because of the appearance of signs or symptoms or throughscreening.Neither of these leads to a definitive diagnosis, which requires the examination of a tissue sample by apathologist.People with suspected cancer are investigated withmedical tests. These commonly includeblood tests,X-rays, CT scansandendoscopy.
The tissuediagnosisfrom the biopsy indicates the type of cell that is proliferating, itshistological grade, genetic abnormalities and other features. Together, this information is useful to evaluate theprognosisand to choose the best treatment.
Cytogeneticsandimmunohistochemistryare other types of tissue tests. These tests provide information about molecular changes  and may thus also indicate the prognosis and best treatment.
Cancer diagnosis can cause psychological distress and psychosocial interventions, such as talking therapy, may help people with this.
Cancers are classified by thetype of cellthat the tumor cells resemble and is therefore presumed to be the origin of the tumor. These types include:
Cancers are usually named using-carcinoma,-sarcomaor-blastomaas a suffix, with the Latin or Greek word for theorganor tissue of origin as the root. For example, cancers of the liverparenchymaarising from malignant epithelial cells is calledhepatocarcinoma, while a malignancy arising from primitive liver precursor cells is called ahepatoblastomaand a cancer arising from fat cells is called aliposarcoma. For some common cancers, the English organ name is used. For example, the most common type of breast cancer is calledductal carcinoma of the breast. Here, the adjectiveductalrefers to the appearance of cancer under the microscope, which suggests that it has originated in the milk ducts.
Benign tumors are named using-omaas a suffix with the organ name as the root. For example, a benign tumor of smooth muscle cells is called aleiomyoma. Confusingly, some types of cancer use the-nomasuffix, examples includingmelanomaandseminoma.
Some types of cancer are named for the size and shape of the cells under a microscope, such as giant cell carcinoma,spindle cell carcinomaandsmall-cell carcinoma.
An invasiveductal carcinomaof the breast  surrounded by spikes of whitish scar tissue and yellow fatty tissue
An invasivecolorectal carcinoma in acolectomyspecimen
Asquamous-cell carcinoma near thebronchiin a lung specimen
A large invasiveductal carcinomain amastectomyspecimen
Cancer prevention is defined as active measures to decrease cancer risk.The vast majority of cancer cases are due to environmental risk factors. Many of these environmental factors are controllable lifestyle choices. Thus, cancer is generally preventable.Between 70% and 90% of common cancers are due to environmental factors and therefore potentially preventable.
Greater than 30% of cancer deaths could be prevented by avoiding risk factors including: tobacco,excess weight/obesity, poor diet,physical inactivity,alcohol,sexually transmitted infectionsand air pollution.Further, poverty could be considered as an indirect risk factor in human cancers.Not all environmental causes are controllable, such as naturally occurringbackground radiationand cancers caused through hereditarygenetic disordersand thus are not preventable via personal behavior.
In2019, ~44% of all cancer deaths – or ~4.5 M deaths or ~105 million lostdisability-adjusted life years– weredue to known clearly preventable risk factors, led bysmoking,alcohol useandhigh BMI, according to aGBDsystematic analysis.
While many dietary recommendations have been proposed to reduce cancer risks, the evidence to support them is not definitive.The primary dietary factors that increase risk areobesityand alcohol consumption. Diets low in fruits and vegetables and high in red meat have been implicated but reviews and meta-analyses do not come to a consistent conclusion.A 2014 meta-analysis found no relationship between fruits and vegetables and cancer.Coffee is associated with a reduced risk ofliver cancer.Studies have linked excessive consumption ofredorprocessed meatto an increased risk of breast cancer,colon cancerandpancreatic cancer, a phenomenon that could be due to the presence ofcarcinogensin meats cooked at high temperatures.In 2015 theIARCreported that eatingprocessed meat and, to a lesser degree,red meatwas linked to some cancers.
Dietary recommendationsfor cancer prevention typically include an emphasis on vegetables, fruit,whole grainsand fish and an avoidance of processed and red meat ,animal fats,pickled foodsandrefined carbohydrates.
Medications can be used to prevent cancer in a few circumstances.In the general population,NSAIDsreduce the risk ofcolorectal cancer; however, due to cardiovascular and gastrointestinal side effects, they cause overall harm when used for prevention.Aspirinhas been found to reduce the risk of death from cancer by about 7%.COX-2 inhibitorsmay decrease the rate ofpolypformation in people withfamilial adenomatous polyposis; however, it is associated with the same adverse effects as NSAIDs.Daily use oftamoxifenorraloxifenereduce the risk of breast cancer in high-risk women.The benefit versus harm for5-alpha-reductase inhibitorsuch asfinasterideis not clear.
Vitaminsupplementation does not appear to be effective at preventing cancer.While low blood levels ofvitamin Dare correlated with increased cancer risk,whether this relationship is causal and vitamin D supplementation is protective is not determined.One 2014 review found that supplements had no significant effect on cancer risk.Another 2014 review concluded that vitamin D3may decrease the risk of death from cancer , but concerns with the quality of the data were noted.
Beta-Carotenesupplementation increases lung cancer rates in those who are high risk.Folic acidsupplementation is not effective in preventing colon cancer and may increase colon polyps.Selenium supplementation has not been shown to reduce the risk of cancer.
Vaccineshave been developed that prevent infection by somecarcinogenicviruses.Human papillomavirus vaccine decrease the risk of developingcervical cancer.Thehepatitis B vaccineprevents infection with hepatitis B virus and thus decreases the risk of liver cancer.The administration of human papillomavirus and hepatitis B vaccinations is recommended where resources allow.
Unlike diagnostic efforts prompted bysymptomsandmedical signs, cancer screening involves efforts to detect cancer after it has formed, but before any noticeable symptoms appear.This may involvephysical examination,bloodorurine testsormedical imaging.
Cancer screeningis not available for many types of cancers. Even when tests are available, they may not be recommended for everyone.Universal screeningormass screeninginvolves screening everyone.Selective screeningidentifies people who are at higher risk, such as people with a family history.Several factors are considered to determine whether the benefits of screening outweigh the risks and the costs of screening.These factors include:
TheU.S. Preventive Services Task Force issues recommendations for various cancers:
Screens forgastric cancerusingphotofluorographydue to the high incidence there.
Genetic testingfor individuals at high-risk of certain cancers is recommended by unofficial groups.Carriers of these mutations may then undergo enhanced surveillance, chemoprevention, or preventative surgery to reduce their subsequent risk.
Many treatment options for cancer exist. The primary ones include surgery,chemotherapy,radiation therapy,hormonal therapy,targeted therapyandpalliative care. Which treatments are used depends on the type, location and grade of the cancer as well as the patient's health and preferences. Thetreatment intentmay or may not be curative.
Chemotherapyis the treatment of cancer with one or morecytotoxicanti-neoplasticdrugs  as part of astandardized regimen. The term encompasses a variety of drugs, which are divided into broad categories such asalkylating agentsandantimetabolites.Traditional chemotherapeutic agents act by killing cells that divide rapidly, a critical property of most cancer cells.
It was found that providing combined cytotoxic drugs is better than a single drug, a process called thecombination therapy, which has an advantage in the statistics of survival and response to the tumor and in the progress of the disease.A Cochrane review concluded that combined therapy was more effective to treat metastasized breast cancer. However, generally it is not certain whether combination chemotherapy leads to better health outcomes, when both survival and toxicity are considered.
Targeted therapyis a form of chemotherapy that targets specific molecular differences between cancer and normal cells. The first targeted therapies blocked theestrogen receptormolecule, inhibiting the growth of breast cancer. Another common example is the class ofBcr-Abl inhibitors, which are used to treatchronic myelogenous leukemia.Currently, targeted therapies exist for many of the most common cancer types, includingbladder cancer, breast cancer,colorectal cancer,kidney cancer,leukemia,liver cancer, lung cancer,lymphoma,pancreatic cancer,prostate cancer,skin cancer, andthyroid canceras well as other cancer types.
The efficacy of chemotherapy depends on the type of cancer and the stage. In combination with surgery, chemotherapy has proven useful in cancer types including breast cancer, colorectal cancer,pancreatic cancer,osteogenic sarcoma,testicular cancer, ovarian cancer and certain lung cancers.Chemotherapy is curative for some cancers, such as someleukemias,ineffective in somebrain tumors,and needless in others, such as mostnon-melanoma skin cancers.The effectiveness of chemotherapy is often limited by its toxicity to other tissues in the body. Even when chemotherapy does not provide a permanent cure, it may be useful to reduce symptoms such as pain or to reduce the size of an inoperable tumor in the hope that surgery will become possible in the future.
Radiation therapyinvolves the use ofionizing radiationin an attempt to either cure or improve symptoms. It works by damaging the DNA of cancerous tissue, causingmitotic catastropheresulting in the death of the cancer cells.To spare normal tissues , shaped radiation beams are aimed from multiple exposure angles to intersect at the tumor, providing a much larger dose there than in the surrounding, healthy tissue. As with chemotherapy, cancers vary in their response to radiation therapy.
Radiation therapy is used in about half of cases. The radiation can be either from internal sources  or external sources. The radiation is most commonly low energy X-rays for treating skin cancers, while higher energy X-rays are used for cancers within the body.Radiation is typically used in addition to surgery and or chemotherapy. For certain types of cancer, such as earlyhead and neck cancer, it may be used alone.For painfulbone metastasis, it has been found to be effective in about 70% of patients.
Surgery is the primary method of treatment for most isolated, solid cancers and may play a role in palliation and prolongation of survival. It is typically an important part of definitive diagnosis and staging of tumors, as biopsies are usually required. In localized cancer, surgery typically attempts to remove the entire mass along with, in certain cases, thelymph nodesin the area. For some types of cancer this is sufficient to eliminate the cancer.
Palliative careis treatment that attempts to help the patient feel better and may be combined with an attempt to treat the cancer. Palliative care includes action to reduce physical, emotional, spiritual and psycho-social distress. Unlike treatment that is aimed at directly killing cancer cells, the primary goal of palliative care is to improvequality of life.
People at all stages of cancer treatment typically receive some kind of palliative care. In some cases,medical specialtyprofessional organizationsrecommend that patients and physicians respond to cancer only with palliative care.This applies to patients who:
Palliative care may be confused withhospiceand therefore only indicated when people approachend of life. Like hospice care, palliative care attempts to help the patient cope with their immediate needs and to increase comfort. Unlike hospice care, palliative care does not require people to stop treatment aimed at the cancer.
Multiple nationalmedical guidelinesrecommend early palliative care for patients whose cancer has produced distressing symptoms or who need help coping with their illness. In patients first diagnosed with metastatic disease, palliative care may be immediately indicated. Palliative care is indicated for patients with a prognosis of less than 12 months of life even given aggressive treatment.
A variety of therapies usingimmunotherapy, stimulating or helping theimmune systemto fight cancer, have come into use since 1997. Approaches includeantibodies, checkpoint therapy, andadoptive cell transfer.
Lasertherapy uses high-intensity light to treat cancer by shrinking or destroying tumors or precancerous growths. Lasers are most commonly used to treat superficial cancers that are on the surface of the body or the lining of internal organs. It is used to treat basal cell skin cancer and the very early stages of others like cervical, penile, vaginal, vulvar, and non-small cell lung cancer. It is often combined with other treatments, such as surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy.Laser-induced interstitial thermotherapy, or interstitial laserphotocoagulation, uses lasers to treat some cancers using hyperthermia, which uses heat to shrink tumors by damaging or killing cancer cells. Laser are more precise than surgery and cause less damage, pain, bleeding, swelling, and scarring. A disadvantage is surgeons must have specialized training. It may be more expensive than other treatments.
Complementary and alternative cancer treatmentsare a diverse group of therapies, practices and products that are not part of conventional medicine."Complementary medicine" refers to methods and substances used along with conventional medicine, while "alternative medicine" refers to compounds used instead of conventional medicine.Most complementary and alternative medicines for cancer have not been studied or tested using conventional techniques such as clinical trials. Some alternative treatments have been investigated and shown to be ineffective but still continue to be marketed and promoted. Cancer researcher Andrew J. Vickers stated, "The label 'unproven' is inappropriate for such therapies; it is time to assert that many alternative cancer therapies have been 'disproven'."
Survival rates vary by cancer type and by the stage at which it is diagnosed, ranging from majority survival to complete mortality five years after diagnosis. Once a cancer has metastasized, prognosis normally becomes much worse. About half of patients receiving treatment for invasive cancer  die from that cancer or its treatment.A majority of cancer deaths are due to metastases of the primary tumor.
Survival is worse in thedeveloping world,partly because the types of cancer that are most common there are harder to treat than those associated withdeveloped countries.
Those who survive cancer develop a second primary cancer at about twice the rate of those never diagnosed.The increased risk is believed to be due to the random chance of developing any cancer, the likelihood of surviving the first cancer, the same risk factors that produced the first cancer, unwanted side effects of treating the first cancer , and better compliance with screening.
Predicting short- or long-term survival depends on many factors. The most important are the cancer type and the patient's age and overall health. Those who arefrailwith other health problems have lower survival rates than otherwise healthy people.Centenariansare unlikely to survive for five years even if treatment is successful. People who report a higher quality of life tend to survive longer.People with lower quality of life may be affected bydepressionand other complications and/or disease progression that both impairs quality and quantity of life. Additionally, patients with worse prognoses may be depressed or report poorer quality of life because they perceive that their condition is likely to be fatal.
People with cancer have an increased risk ofblood clots in their veinswhich can be life-threatening.The use ofblood thinnerssuch asheparindecrease the risk of blood clots but have not been shown to increase survival in people with cancer.People who take blood thinners also have an increased risk of bleeding.
Although extremely rare, some forms of cancer, even from an advanced stage, can heal spontaneously. This phenomenon is known as thespontaneous remission.
Estimates are that in 2018, 18.1 million new cases of cancer and 9.6 million deaths occur globally.About 20% of males and 17% of females will get cancer at some point in time while 13% of males and 9% of females will die from it.
In 2008, approximately 12.7 million cancers werediagnosedand in 2010 nearly 7.98 million people died.Cancers account for approximately 16% of deaths. The most common as of 2018are lung cancer ,colorectal cancerstomach cancer,liver cancer, and breast cancer .This makes invasive cancer the leading cause of death in thedeveloped worldand the second leading in thedeveloping world.Over half of cases occur in the developing world.
Deaths from cancer were 5.8 million in 1990.Deaths have been increasing primarily due to longer lifespans and lifestyle changes in the developing world.The most significantrisk factorfor developing cancer is age.Although it is possible for cancer to strike at any age, most patients with invasive cancer are over 65.According to cancer researcherRobert A. Weinberg, "If we lived long enough, sooner or later we all would get cancer."Some of the association between aging and cancer is attributed toimmunosenescence,errors accumulated inDNAover a lifetimeand age-related changes in theendocrine system.Aging's effect on cancer is complicated by factors such as DNA damage and inflammation promoting it and factors such as vascular aging and endocrine changes inhibiting it.
Some slow-growing cancers are particularly common, but often are not fatal.Autopsystudies in Europe and Asia showed that up to 36% of people have undiagnosed and apparently harmlessthyroid cancerat the time of their deaths and that 80% of men developprostate cancerby age 80.As these cancers do not cause the patient's death, identifying them would have representedoverdiagnosisrather than useful medical care.
The three most commonchildhood cancersareleukemia,brain tumors andlymphomas.In the United States cancer affects about 1 in 285 children.Rates of childhood cancer increased by 0.6% per year between 1975 and 2002 in the United Statesand by 1.1% per year between 1978 and 1997 in Europe.Death from childhood cancer decreased by half between 1975 and 2010 in the United States.
In the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries, it became acceptable for doctors todissect bodiesto discover the cause of death.The German professorWilhelm Fabrybelieved that breast cancer was caused by a milk clot in a mammary duct. The Dutch professorFrancois de la Boe Sylvius, a follower ofDescartes, believed that all disease was the outcome of chemical processes and that acidiclymphfluid was the cause of cancer. His contemporaryNicolaes Tulpbelieved that cancer was a poison that slowly spreads and concluded that it wascontagious.
The physician John Hill describedtobacco sniffingas the cause of nose cancer in 1761.This was followed by the report in 1775 by British surgeonPercivall Pottthatchimney sweeps' carcinoma, a cancer of thescrotum, was a common disease amongchimney sweeps.With the widespread use of the microscope in the 18th century, it was discovered that the 'cancer poison' spread from the primary tumor through the lymph nodes to other sites . This view of the disease was first formulated by the English surgeonCampbell De Morganbetween 1871 and 1874.
Although many diseases  may have a worse prognosis than most cases of cancer, cancer is the subject of widespread fear and taboos. Theeuphemismof "a long illness" to describe cancers leading to death is still commonly used in obituaries, rather than naming the disease explicitly, reflecting an apparentstigma.Cancer is also euphemised as "the C-word";Macmillan Cancer Supportuses the term to try to lessen the fear around the disease.In Nigeria, one local name for cancer translates into English as "the disease that cannot be cured".This deep belief that cancer is necessarily a difficult and usually deadly disease is reflected in the systems chosen by society to compile cancer statistics: the most common form of cancer—non-melanomaskin cancers, accounting for about one-third of cancer cases worldwide, but very few deaths—are excluded from cancer statistics specifically because they are easily treated and almost always cured, often in a single, short, outpatient procedure.
Western conceptions ofpatients' rightsfor people with cancer include a duty to fully disclose the medical situation to the person, and the right to engage inshared decision-makingin a way that respects the person's own values. In other cultures, other rights and values are preferred. For example, most African cultures value whole families rather thanindividualism. In parts of Africa, a diagnosis is commonly made so late that cure is not possible, and treatment, if available at all, would quickly bankrupt the family. As a result of these factors, African healthcare providers tend to let family members decide whether, when and how to disclose the diagnosis, and they tend to do so slowly and circuitously, as the person shows interest and an ability to cope with the grim news.People from Asian and South American countries also tend to prefer a slower, less candid approach to disclosure than is idealized in the United States and Western Europe, and they believe that sometimes it would be preferable not to be told about a cancer diagnosis.In general, disclosure of the diagnosis is more common than it was in the 20th century, but full disclosure of the prognosis is not offered to many patients around the world.
In the United States and some other cultures, cancer is regarded as a disease that must be "fought" to end the "civil insurrection"; aWar on Cancerwas declared in the US. Military metaphors are particularly common in descriptions of cancer's human effects, and they emphasize both the state of the patient's health and the need to take immediate, decisive actions himself rather than to delay, to ignore or to rely entirely on others. The military metaphors also help rationalize radical, destructive treatments.
In the 1970s, a relatively popularalternative cancer treatmentin the US was a specialized form oftalk therapy, based on the idea that cancer was caused by a bad attitude.People with a "cancer personality"—depressed, repressed, self-loathing and afraid to express their emotions—were believed to have manifested cancer through subconscious desire. Some psychotherapists said that treatment to change the patient's outlook on life would cure the cancer.Among other effects, this belief allowed society toblame the victimfor having caused the cancer  or having prevented its cure .It also increased patients' anxiety, as they incorrectly believed that natural emotions of sadness, anger or fear shorten their lives.The idea was ridiculed bySusan Sontag, who publishedIllness as Metaphorwhile recovering from treatment for breast cancer in 1978.Although the original idea is now generally regarded as nonsense, the idea partly persists in a reduced form with a widespread, but incorrect, belief that deliberately cultivating a habit ofpositive thinkingwill increase survival.This notion is particularly strong inbreast cancer culture.
One idea about why people with cancer are blamed or stigmatized, called thejust-world hypothesis, is that blaming cancer on the patient's actions or attitudes allows the blamers to regain a sense of control. This is based upon the blamers' belief that the world is fundamentally just and so any dangerous illness, like cancer, must be a type of punishment for bad choices, because in a just world, bad things would not happen to good people.
The total health care expenditure on cancer in the US was estimated to be $80.2 billion in 2015.Even though cancer-related health care expenditure have increased in absolute terms during recent decades, the share of health expenditure devoted to cancer treatment has remained close to 5% between the 1960s and 2004.A similar pattern has been observed in Europe where about 6% of all health care expenditure are spent on cancer treatment.In addition to health care expenditure andfinancial toxicity, cancer causes indirect costs in the form of productivity losses due to sick days, permanent incapacity and disability as well as premature death during working age. Cancer causes also costs for informal care. Indirect costs and informal care costs are typically estimated to exceed or equal the health care costs of cancer.
In the United States, cancer is included as a protected condition by theEqual Employment Opportunity Commission, mainly due to the potential for cancer having discriminating effects on workers.Discrimination in the workplace could occur if an employer holds a false belief that a person with cancer is not capable of doing a job properly, and may ask for moresick leavethan other employees. Employers may also make hiring or firing decisions based on misconceptions about cancer disabilities, if present. The EEOC provides interview guidelines for employers, as well as lists of possible solutions for assessing and accommodating employees with cancer.
Women are six times more likely to be separated ordivorcedsoon after a diagnosis of cancer ormultiple sclerosisthan men. Doctors in neuro-oncology practices noticed that divorce occurred almost exclusively when the wife was the patient.
Because cancer is a class of diseases,it is unlikely that there will ever be a single "cure for cancer" any more than there will be a single treatment for allinfectious diseases.Angiogenesis inhibitorswere once incorrectly thought to have potential as a "silver bullet" treatment applicable to many types of cancer.Angiogenesis inhibitors and other cancer therapeutics are used in combination to reduce cancer morbidity and mortality.
Experimental cancer treatmentsare studied inclinical trialsto compare the proposed treatment to the best existing treatment. Treatments that succeeded in one cancer type can be tested against other types.Diagnostic tests are under development to better target the right therapies to the right patients, based on their individual biology.
Cancer research focuses on the following issues:
The improved understanding ofmolecular biologyandcellular biologydue to cancer research has led to new treatments for cancer since US PresidentRichard Nixondeclared the "War on Cancer" in 1971. Since then, the country has spent over $200 billion on cancer research, including resources from public and private sectors.The cancer death rate  declined by five percent between 1950 and 2005.
Competition for financial resources appears to have suppressed the creativity, cooperation, risk-taking and original thinking required to make fundamental discoveries, unduly favoring low-risk research into small incremental advancements over riskier, more innovative research. Other consequences of competition appear to be many studies with dramatic claims whose results cannot be replicated and perverse incentives that encourage grantee institutions to grow without making sufficient investments in their own faculty and facilities.
Virotherapy, which uses convert viruses, is being studied.
In the wake of theCOVID-19pandemic, there has been a worry that cancer research and treatment are slowing down.
Cancer affects approximately 1 in 1,000 pregnant women. The most common cancers found during pregnancy are the same as the most common cancers found in non-pregnant women during childbearing ages: breast cancer, cervical cancer, leukemia, lymphoma, melanoma, ovarian cancer and colorectal cancer.
Diagnosing a new cancer in a pregnant woman is difficult, in part because any symptoms are commonly assumed to be a normal discomfort associated with pregnancy. As a result, cancer is typically discovered at a somewhat later stage than average. Some imaging procedures, such asMRIs,CT scans, ultrasounds andmammogramswith fetal shielding are considered safe during pregnancy; some others, such asPET scans, are not.
Treatment is generally the same as for non-pregnant women. However, radiation and radioactive drugs are normally avoided during pregnancy, especially if the fetal dose might exceed 100 cGy. In some cases, some or all treatments are postponed until after birth if the cancer is diagnosed late in the pregnancy. Early deliveries are often used to advance the start of treatment. Surgery is generally safe, but pelvic surgeries during the first trimester may cause miscarriage. Some treatments, especially certain chemotherapy drugs given during thefirst trimester, increase the risk ofbirth defectsand pregnancy loss .
Elective abortions are not required and, for the most common forms and stages of cancer, do not improve the mother's survival. In a few instances, such as advanced uterine cancer, the pregnancy cannot be continued and in others, the patient may end the pregnancy so that she can begin aggressive chemotherapy.
Some treatments can interfere with the mother's ability to give birth vaginally or to breastfeed.Cervical cancer may require birth byCaesarean section. Radiation to the breast reduces the ability of that breast to produce milk and increases the risk ofmastitis. Also, when chemotherapy is given after birth, many of the drugs appear in breast milk, which could harm the baby.
Veterinary oncology, concentrating mainly on cats and dogs, is a growing specialty in wealthy countries and the major forms of human treatment such as surgery and radiotherapy may be offered. The most common types of cancer differ, but the cancer burden seems at least as high in pets as in humans. Animals, typically rodents, are often used in cancer research and studies of natural cancers in larger animals may benefit research into human cancer.
Across wild animals, there is still limited data on cancer. Nonetheless, a study published in 2022, explored cancer risk in  zoo mammals, belonging to 191 species, 110,148 individual, demonstrated that cancer is a ubiquitous disease of mammals and it can emerge anywhere along the mammalian phylogeny.This research also highlighted that cancer risk is not uniformly distributed along mammals. For instance, species in the orderCarnivoraare particularly prone to be affected by cancer , whileungulates appear to face consistently low cancer risks.
In non-humans, a few types oftransmissible cancerhave also been described, wherein the cancer spreads between animals by transmission of the tumor cells themselves. This phenomenon is seen in dogs withSticker's sarcoma, and inTasmanian devilswithdevil facial tumour disease.
